my guest today is dr. siddharth
mukherjee Pulitzer prize-winning author
well-known oncologist and one of the
foremost public intellectuals and
thinkers of our time he is in India to
address the Deepika Padukone in LED live
laugh love foundation that shines a
light on mental health mental health is
something that's close to sidharth's own
family history and something he has
spoken and written about with extreme
intimacy and Candace said Hart welcome
to the show
cancer and mental health have in a sense
been the twin obsessions or of your
writings of much of your work of much of
your medicine research as well I want to
start by asking you whether you think
that writing your two books the emperor
of maladies and the book you wrote on
the gene and intimate history have made
it easier have changed responses to
mental health in a country like India
where this conversation remains
extremely stigmatized even now well I
think the the books allowed me to
understand I'm an oncologist I I'm not a
mental health professional but certainly
there's been many issues of mental
health in my family and in my family's
history which I've written about
I think that conversation around mental
health issues is increasing part of my
sort of understanding of all of this
grew out of how cancer awareness grew
and became a big movement a campaign in
the history of the United States and
other places mental health is going
through some of this process itself the
the stigmatization the first time that
people are talking more openly about it
you know 50 years ago people wouldn't
talk openly open you got cancer so there
are some very broad parallels between
what is going on socially and
politically in cancer and also socially
agree what's going on in the world of
mental health I do want to first talk a
little bit about the mental health
issues because you're right you're an
oncologist but some of your most
intimate accounts have been about your
family's struggle with mental health
your your uncle's your cousins and at
one point you're sort of mortal fears
that this was genetic it was
predetermined to something that would in
a sense reside in you and passed on to
your church
can you speak a little bit about your
struggle and why you then decided to
write such a personal account in a
public to win well one of the things
that's becoming very clear about some
forms of mental illness such as
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder both
of which run in my family one thing
that's becoming very clear is that these
are both genetic and environmental
diseases by genetic I mean we now have
begun to understand very clearly that
there are multiple variations of genes
that contribute you can inherit these
from a pairs no one there's no one gene
or one gene for either schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder but I would say that if
you inherit a bunch of if a combination
of often genetic variations from your
parents your you have a heightened risk
but even that doesn't complete the risk
you have to have environmental factors
we now know that even make the disease
fully manifested itself and themselves
so I knew from from from I knew that I
carried risk because this was in my
family runs through families and I
wanted to not experienced it so I wanted
to write about it almost as a mechanism
of understanding myself you know how it
had it back in my own life and really
explaining to others how deeply and how
consequentially genetic variation can
have a very important role in all of our
lives it's not some kind of abstract
thing that happens to people other
people you know virtually every family
has a history of some illness and that
illness again may have some genetic and
environmental components so I wanted to
bring all of this out and also you know
talk be able to talk about this without
shame or stigma or without you know just
say that this is part of your story part
of my story that's why the book is
called the gene and intimate history you
know you could write a history of
genetics which without telling that
historic story but you know the funny
thing about writing such a history is to
generate
which you don't tell your own story it's
like saying you know on one hand you're
saying this is about you
jeans are about you jeans were hard part
of part of what makes you and yet you
know the question then arises well where
are you how are you how are you made in
the context of your own personal jeans
so as a writer but also as a doctor I
wanted to sort of bring these two pieces
together now there are ethical questions
thrown out by any debate around the kind
of pre determinism that your that your
genes may leave you with and I you know
I have met medical practitioners even in
India that are now talking about how
diabetes can be reversed that it is all
in your genes you know it may be a
little bit in your diet in your
lifestyle but it is also in your genes
and once this starts getting applied to
more and more sort of ailments and and
it becomes part of the sort of
diagnostic process are you concerned
about a kind of new-age eugenics are you
concerned about a kind of new-age racism
that this kind of this kind of science
if misused good result
well so the you know this science is
always on the has the danger of being
used and misused we've seen many
historical examples when again we've
seen many historical examples of the use
of science to save lives to emancipate
humans you know we are living many of us
have finally been able to live longer
infant mortality has decreased
dramatically in in not only in this
country but across the world but all
also science has its misuses eugenics Oh
Gen X is the idea that you could use
genes or one would use genetic selection
as a mechanism for determining the fate
of your child and eugenics is always
threatening especially in countries
where I think especially in countries
where there's a great premium placed on
any quality right so for instance in
India there's a premium placed on being
male or having a male child and in fact
if you look in several parts of India
this is very well published data the
ratio of male versus female children
could be as abnormal it's used
one-to-one but the ratio of male versus
female surviving children can be as
skewed as a 1 to 0.8 enough in other
words for every 10 men or you know there
are over there only 7 women children
surviving women children - you know at
least in adulthood so that is a form of
eugenics these where do these children
disappear they step disappeared some way
there was a genetic selection in the
case in that case so I think the ethical
concerns are are absolutely there one
thing is it turns out that most most of
the common human diseases are not
disease of one gene variants so it's not
as there is one gene for one disease
that's one point and so selection as it
were genetic selection eugenics for
these diseases is not simple it's not
simple to do because there are many gene
variations and the second point is that
many of these diseases not all of many
of these diseases have a very important
environmental component so it's a little
bit like you have the gun but without
the trigger the gun doesn't fire so it's
a predisposition
it's a predisposition not an absolute
disposition so and it's a statistical
disposition in other words I could say
you know you will be 50% chance that you
will encounter breast cancer in your
lifetime but it's very rare to be able
to say there's a hundred percent chance
that you'll encounter breast cancer in
your lifetime and that's because it's a
combination of course of inheriting a
gene in the case of familial forms of
breast cancer and some environmental
chance component that we don't fully
understand in that case do you as an
oncologist advise people patients to do
what an Angelina Jolie did which is that
you get yourself gene mapped and then
you say I don't even want to take X
percent chance so I'd rather just have
my breasts removed so as I said in the
case of in the case of in the case of
breast cancer there there are risk genes
you can sequence them you can find them
in your body and certain you can find
family history I had you know we are
only one of many people who advise such
men and women because they meet genetic
counselors they would meet a
psychiatrist or psychologist at some
point of time they would meet with their
oncologist with me and we offer them not
advice but try to elicit what they're in
you know what they want to do we offer
them lots of options you know for a
woman with the highest higher risk for
breast cancer but we know that the
genetics is quite clear we don't know
for most breast cancer but for some
breast cancer we know genetics is quite
clear we offer them advice that could
range all the way from well let's wait
and watch - you know let's try a
medicine there are medicines that will
reduce the risk to you know more radical
forms of therapy such as bilateral
mastectomies and allow them to choose we
you know without them to make the
decisions themselves because they have
to make the decision but apply that to
let's say your own concern with mental
health and your family's sort of genetic
history with it how did you deal with it
did you say I want to be gene mapped did
you say knowing maybe that there was no
single gene as you've explained that
could be a marker did you still have
that sort of maybe anxiety of being gene
map and looking using yourself almost as
you know your own your own body as in
laboratory yeah well so I could say
personally I have not been gene mapped
and that's what several reasons number
one is in fact the genes for
schizophrenia and bipolar illness are
not very well known and still remain not
very well known they were certainly not
known in 2016 when the book when my book
was finished and they are even in 2019
were still discovering what their
identity is so we don't have any
predictive way of telling you know if a
person will have a high risk for
schizophrenia or not so so therefore I
didn't feel that the knowledge we
would be so clear however I should say
the things I can still it's very much an
anxiety whether you know exactly what
your genetic sequences or not anxieties
very much how do you deal with it well I
think I deal with it by monitoring and
trying first of all being trying to
understand and and thinking to myself
you know are we first what I've read a
lot and try to see you know is it time
that will under have begun to understand
these genetic risks but secondly you
know with with with illnesses such as
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
you can certainly sense symptoms and I
suppose I'm more acutely on guard or
only aware of my mental state and if you
feel yourself slipping into that that
space do you Sam I don't I don't
particularly into that space which is
thankful but I'm talking aware there are
certain anxieties that if and when I you
know if and when my mental state changes
is it because of there's a chance event
that's happening my life is done having
a bad day or a good day or is it because
something is going on that you know
predicts other things that will happen
to my brain or in the future so gene
mapping then and it's I'm asking this
because it's very important for our
viewers to understand this therefore I'm
reiterating it gene mapping is not a
common prescriptive advice for where
science is today because a lot of people
may see a celebrity like a Jolie and say
okay maybe we should do that too and you
are saying there are only certain kinds
of diseases of illnesses of ailments
where there can be a specific gene
marker right that list is expanding okay
and as I said it's there some illnesses
where the gene is very single handedly
responsible can you give some other
sickle cell disease is one example so in
other words if you inherit two variants
one from your mom and one from your dad
of the sickle cell anemia gene it's a
variation in a hemoglobin gene
then then chances are that in your
lifetime you will get sickle cell so
that's basically one gene you can
sequence that one gene you can you'll
know immediately cystic fibrosis is
another example and in the case of
breast cancer there there are some
examples of genes where single gene
mutations will or single gene changes
will set you up at a higher risk for the
cancer for the most of the human
diseases such as cardiac illness
schizophrenia bipolar disorder obesity
in the case of you and and to end even
diabetes some forms of diabetes two
things are true they have a familial
pattern so everyone many people um not
everyone many people in a family may
have the disease in those cases we are
just beginning to find out that there's
not one gene but multiple genes hundreds
maybe even thousands of gene variants
that contribute to the disease and we
can begin to ascribe risk to an
individual patient right now that set is
quite limited uh let's talk a little bit
about where we are in the fight against
cancer and I ask you this because in
August I read an article in the
Scientific American which actually
looked specifically at your book the
Emperor of maladies and while it you
know it praised the book as a great work
of journalism it had one disagreement
with you and it said that you were too
optimistic and that if there had in fact
been somewhat of a decline in mortality
rate from cancers this was in large
measure to the fact that fewer people
was smoking today that smoking had in
fact become mercifully stigmatized and
that in terms of scientific advances
this this article argue they hadn't been
that much where do you stand on that
argument well I have many things to say
about about the argument number one is
that the detection of smoking as a
carcinogen is is is part of the success
of the care anti-cancer program in other
words you can't say you can't say you
know gosh you know the cancer program
has not not been successful because
smoking has been smoking has solved so
much smoking is very
part and parcel of the anti-cancer
program the identification of tobacco
smoke as a carcinogen and our
understanding of how you accumulate risk
who are the patients were the greatest
at risk etc has evolved very greatly and
evolved because very much because of the
scientific methods that are part of the
anti-cancer project so the real
criticism was not that I think the
concern is not that you know science or
cancer science has not had impact on on
mortality it has absolutely had in fact
but that you know cancer treatment yes
not cancer prevention or cancer early
detection but cancer treatment has had a
limited has had very limited success
that is true for some cancers but
absolutely not true for other cancers so
even common cancers such as breast
cancer the mortality has decreased maybe
one two in the in the United States
maybe one to two percent every year now
you could say what do - first percent
doesn't matter but it's cumulative so
over the course of about twenty odd
years twenty five or years the mortality
for breath from breast cancer has
decreased by about twenty twenty five
percent that's a big number that has big
impact now in general if you look at the
history of diseases so-called
epidemiology epidemiological history
treatment doesn't tend to have the most
Impala health impact because a smaller
fraction of patients are treated and a
smaller fraction of patients than can be
proved then when the disease can be
prevented so for instance if you look at
the history of the decrease of deaths
from infectious diseases such as cholera
and diphtheria etcetera etcetera most of
that decline has been because of public
health measures sanitation hygiene and
vaccination etc it's not been because
all of a sudden we found antibiotics now
would you say the anti antibiotics are
useless
absolutely not they're very useful in
case you of course get have have an
infectious infectious illness so I think
it's
I think it's overly nihilistic and
overly simplistic to say cancer
treatment has not had any impact or
minimal impact on on the lives of cancer
patients but you know pre prevention has
had the most impact and will hopefully
continue to have impact but there are
cancers that we are being able to treat
where the impact has been enormous they
have certainly not been other cancers
such as pancreatic cancer acute
myelogenous leukemia where in fact we
haven't been able to make any difference
really any substantial difference in the
survivor of survivorship of some
patients talking about prevention as
something that is working or has worked
when it comes to cancer there's been a
lot of global focus and I know you've
done some research yourself on the links
between diet and cancer and you know you
tweeted about this you have a published
paper on the ketogenic diet it's much
the fad right now in India and globally
and I think it's really important to
explain in simple terms what your
research found on the keto diet and any
possible links with cancer or in terms
of prevention or treatment so my work
with the ketogenic diet in collaboration
with Luke Ansley has is quite restricted
it has nothing to say whatsoever about
whether keto diets work prevent or do
anything to cancer by themselves we
discovered we were following a very
important but very constrained
restricted question which is that women
given a certain kind of targeted therapy
women with breast cancer began to become
diabetic and we wondered whether the
medicine was making them diabetic and if
if that consequence diabetes that was
you know coming as a side effect of the
medicine the chemotherapy that they were
getting if that was contributing to
their cancer becoming resistant I liken
this to the famous story of the
woodcutter who sits on a branch and
chops off his own branch so in other
words your own body is response to the
drug was chopping off your capacity to
to
Spahn to the drug your own physiological
response to the drug was cutting off
your cancers response to the drug like
the woodcutter cutting off his own tree
so the conclusion of this paper is that
key is that the ketogenic diet in
combination with this drug not by itself
not by itself is helpful in now making
the cancers die cancer cells die and
hopefully you know you know hopefully
increase the chances that you will have
a remission or a response to the cancer
of two important caveats we talked about
one already the ketogenic diet by itself
was not effective at all or was in fact
even worse on some cancers in animal
models so that's the first point to say
the second point is all of this is
animal data with human cancers but but
data generated with simple systems so we
have to do a human trial and we're in
the midst of doing a very very large and
I would say very sophisticated human
study to find out if the ketogenic diet
in combination with this this family of
medicines I will have a profound effect
to be hope I will have a profound effect
on cancer now there is a separate study
funded by the National Institutes of
Health which one looks at the ketogenic
diet by itself first of all in
preventing insulin resistance or early
forms of diabetes in patients so there
is one study there are other studies
that are on their way which will look at
the impact of ketogenic diet on
prevention of various diseases these are
all early in their in their research
Anastacia in their research so I don't
think we know yet firmly whether the
ketogenic diet actually helps or doesn't
help we know that there is a that people
lose weight we don't
No if because the diet is relatively
high in fat and protein particularly fat
we don't know what form of fat is
healthy for patients and we don't know
what the effects are for instance on the
heart etc most patients again
anecdotally will report losing weight
and their diabetes is often brought into
control because the insulin is the
amount of insulin requirement is
decreased so that is I would say there
is evidence for that there's evidence in
the literature for that but we need to
run a proper study hopefully a
randomized crossover study to understand
whether patients should take it so
before our humans should take it so
before these studies come out I
generally recommend that without the
advice of your physician and guidance
that you shouldn't destroy it by
yourself so it's not it's not a fad that
you would personally apply to your own
life I don't you know i don't i follow a
relatively healthy diet i do believe
that that our society has excess
carbohydrates excess sugar excess use of
sugar and that is one mechanism that is
contributing to obesity and in turn
obesity is contributing to diabetes
especially if you if you have a family
history of diabetes i think there is a
contribution link between obesity and
diabetes obesity inflammation and I
should say obesity and cancer so in
general I think reducing carbs and sugar
is reducing sugar in particular is a
good idea now where is sort of the new
frontier of research with with cancer
and I've been sort of hearing you speak
a little bit about this reading a little
bit about it cell therapy can you talk a
little bit about this this is a space
you're just getting into you're bringing
it to India and I mean I think we'd all
like to know more well I think it's I
think it's one of the most exciting
frontiers for cancer treatment is to
take a person's individual immune cells
and weapon
them weaponized by weaponizing them I
mean you train the cells using gene
therapy you train the cells to kill the
cancer and these treatments have have
been extraordinarily successful for some
diseases especially blood cancers in the
United States so these are called car
t-cells will call them car t-cells it's
a long acronym but these therapies have
been extremely successful they're
difficult to make they're difficult to
regulate they are difficult to keep
clean so we decided that but but they
are life life saving in the United
States these therapies can cost up from
300,000 dollars per patient to 1 million
dollars per patient it's obviously an
incredible amount of money we thought
that we should number one provide these
therapies in India for the first time if
we can you know send satellites up and
if we can have one of the most
successful software in tech industries
we can certainly provide this kind of
therapy to very needy patients pediatric
patients patients with terminal cancer
so we decided to create a new model in
which I teamed up with several groups
but most importantly Biocon and singeing
to create a completely new cell therapy
facility into cell therapy unit in India
and we hope to be able to deliver these
therapies to children and adults you
know as soon as possible as soon as next
year at more affordable rates than
they're available we are highly
confident that we will get more
affordable rates because of the
ingenuity of Engineers here we don't
want to compromise the safety or quality
but we have to really take take you know
take this very seriously so the company
is called EMU Neil it is a consortium it
is an in you know people it's a it's a
mixture of investors most of whom we
really believe that India
be like any place you know any place in
the United States or in Europe where you
can avail of the latest therapies but in
this case we hope at at least one fifth
or one-tenth the cost very interesting
in way that kind of makes me want to ask
you where you come in on this whole
debate in India it's a fierce debate
between sort of generic drugs affordable
on the one hand and upholding sort of
intellectual property rights on the
other how do you see well I think there
I think there is a life cycle
that drugs should go through in which
they for a while
the inventors should be allowed and the
pharmaceutical companies that took the
risks should be allowed to recoup the
risks if we don't allow that innovation
the cycle of innovation stops the Food
and Drug Administration last year in the
United States approved 50 odd drugs
it's a record number the year before
that it was 40 something the years
before that have been in the 30s etc so
we are at an accelerated pace and that
accelerated pace is a consequence of
funded biomedical research so basic
research and also of course clinical and
translational research is a combination
of those those two things but both of
them require innovation it's an it's an
innovation cycle that makes human
medicines possible if we stunt the
innovation cycle anywhere then of course
we stunt the capacity to make new
medicines this is a you know this would
be this would be obvious but on the
other hand you also want these medicines
to reach the human population so the
natural life cycle of a medicine should
begin with the inventors the people who
put blood sweat and tears into the birth
of the medicine to be able to be able to
be recoup their investment their
personal investments their lives spent
but over time these drugs should and
will become generic India's very good at
producing these generic versions but the
lifecycle of a drug should
maintained and it should be maintained
in a thoughtful manner obviously you
know not you know not as not allowing
them to be patented forever but also
allowing the generated generics to go
and and further cheapen the costs of
production
one last question a personal question I
read a really moving account by you of
your father's last few days and before
you bring him home from the ICU you
described this almost chilling you know
sort of account of how you're moving him
from one part of the hospital to the
other and as his sodium stabilizes the
doctors just say we need these beds you
know more there are patients in the line
waiting for these beds you've got to go
to another part of the hospital there's
a rickety wooden sort of things serving
up as a stretcher you're lifting it
yourself with the assistant getting him
into some makeshift kind of ambulance it
was really disturbing to read this yet
this is the reality of of Indians in
health care and I'm just wondering what
that experience made you feel about the
state of health care public health care
in particular in the country of
fluoridation well you see the experience
was I was like being on a roller coaster
or a sine wave on one hand we
experienced extraordinary care from I
did from doctors and nurses and all
sorts of accessory stuff it was of
extraordinary quality it had it was
based on reason scientifically thought
out medically thought out and clinically
executed so so that was all that was the
sort of the the peak of the of the
roller coaster and there were many such
examples a conversation with a
geriatrician that I you know was really
of the you know very deeply thought out
conversation a conversation with his
endocrinologist when his insulin and
sodium could not be stabilized but on
the other hand there were sudden
failures like
you know like having a big rift in the
middle or right in the middle of these
these experiences as well and almost all
of them had to do with infrastructure so
yeah you couldn't blame anyone there was
not a faulty person there was a faulty
system and a demand supply mismatch and
a demand supply mismatch so you know you
go from the ICU which could be where the
level of care was of the highest caliber
but then you can't move the patient to a
bed because the ambulance is broken
right meanwhile you know extraordinarily
high tech instruments are being operated
and understood at the ICU that was the
experience over and over again that
somehow the infrastructural components
that keep medicine together the glue
that keeps medicine together is often
the place where the breakages are acute
and those breakages are just as
dangerous to patients as not having an
instrument in the ICU and that's one of
the things to recognize is that medicine
occurs a good medicine of corrosion in
ecology you know if a nurse or a doctor
or whoever it might be makes makes a
chronic mistake then tired you know all
the words yeah collapses so that was
that was the experience and it was a it
was also a learning experience for the
United States you know for my own work
you know what were the what are the
difference dead because of course there
also
yeah breakage is of infrastructure yeah
well so that the the new research sounds
in particular exciting and I'm going to
be reading up more on that it's always a
pleasure to have you
yeah thank you thank you